
He urges us to let go of habitual negative attitudes and unnecessary attachments, which only weigh us down. To make this Journey, we must be light, happy and free to go Dancing! 'I wish I could show you, When you are lonely or in darkness, The Astonishing Light Of your own Being" And Applaud Once a young man came to me and said, "Dear Master, 
I am feeling strong and brave today, And I would like to know the truth 
About all of my-attachments." 
And I replied, 
"Attachments? 
Attachments! 
Sweet Heart, 
Do you really want me to speak to you 
About all your attachments, 
When I can see so clearly 
You have built, with so much care, 
Such a great brothel 
To house all of your pleasures. 
You have even surrounded the whole damn place 
With armed guards and vicious dogs 
To protect your desires 
So that you can sneak away 
From time to time 
And try to squeeze light 
Into your parched being 
From a source as fruitful 
As a dried date pit 
That even a bird 
Is wise enough to spit out. 
Your attachments! My dear, 
Let's not speak of those, 
For Hafiz understands the sufferings 
Of your heart. 
Hafiz knows 
The torments and the agonies 
That every mind on the way to Annihilation in the Sun 
Must endure. 
So at night in my prayers I often stop 
And ask a thousand angels to join in 
And Applaud, 
And Applaud 
Anything, 
Anything in this world 
That can bring your heart comfort!" 
Cast All Your Votes for Dancing I know the voice of depression 
Still calls to you. 
I know those habits that can ruin your life 
Still send their invitations . 
But you are with the Friend now 
And look so much stronger. 
You can stay that way 
And even bloom! 
Keep squeezing drops of the Sun 
From your prayers and work and music 
And from your companions' beautiful laughter. 
Keep squeezing drops of the Sun 
From the sacred hands and glance of your Beloved 
And, my dear, 
From the most insignificant movements 
Of your own holy body. 
Learn to recognize the counterfeit coins 
That may buy you just a moment of pleasure, 
But then drag you for days 
Like a broken man 
Behind a farting camel. 
You are with the Friend now. 
Learn what actions of yours delight Him, 
What actions of yours bring freedom 
And Love. 
Whenever you say God's name, dear pilgrim, 
My ears wish my head was missing 
So they could finally kiss each other 
And applaud all your nourishing wisdom! 
O keep squeezing drops of the Sun 
From your prayers and work and music 
And from your companions' beautiful laughter 
And from the most insignificant movements 
Of your own holy body. 
Now, sweet one, 
Be wise. 
Cast all your votes for Dancing! 
The Jeweler 
If a naive and desperate man 
Brings a precious stone 
To the only jeweler in town, 
Wanting to sell it, 
The jeweler's eyes 
Will begin to play a game, 
Like most eyes in the world when they look at you. 
The jeweler's face will stay calm. 
He will not want to reveal the stone's true value, 
But to hold the man captive to fear and greed 
While he calculates 
The value of the transaction. 
But one moment with me, my dear, 
Will show you 
That there is nothing, 
Nothing 
Hafiz wants from you. 
When you sit before a Master like me, 
Even if you are a drooling mess, 
My eyes sing with Excitement 
They see your Divine Worth. 
Saints Bowing in the Mountains 
Do you know how beautiful you are? I think not, my dear. For as you talk of God, 
I see great parades with wildly colorful bands 
Streaming from your mind and heart, 
Carrying wonderful and secret messages 
To every corner of this world. 
I see saints bowing in the mountains 
Hundreds of miles away 
To the wonder of sounds 
That break into light 
From your most common words. 
Speak to me of your mother, 
Your cousins and your friends. 
Tell me of squirrels and birds you know. 
Awaken your legion of nightingales -  
Let them soar wild and free in the sky 
And begin to sing to God. 
Let's all begin to sing to God! 
Do you know how beautiful you are? 
I think not, my dear, 
Yet Hafiz 
Could set you upon a Stage 
And worship you forever! 
Zero Zero 
Is where the Real Fun starts. 
There's too much counting 
Everywhere else! 
If It Is Not Too Dark 
Go for a walk, if it is not too dark. 
Get some fresh air, try to smile. 
Say something kind 
To a safe-looking stranger, if one happens by. 
Always exercise your heart's knowing. 
You might as well attempt something real 
Along this path: 
Take your spouse or lover into your arms 
The way you did when you first met. 
Let tenderness pour from your eyes 
The way the Sun gazes warmly on the earth. 
Play a game with some children. 
Extend yourself to a friend. 
Sing a few ribald songs to your pets and plants – 
Why not let them get drunk and wild! 
Let's toast 
Every rung we've climbed on Evolution's ladder. 
Whisper, "I love you! I love you!" 
To the whole mad world. 
Let's stop reading about God  .We will never understand Him. 
Jump to your feet, wave your fists, 
Threaten and warn the whole Universe 
That your heart can no longer live 
Without real love! 
Awake Awhile Awake awhile. It does not have to be 
Forever, 
Right now. 
One step upon the Sky's soft skirt 
Would be enough. 
Hafiz, 
Awake awhile. 
Just one True moment of Love 
Will last for days. 
Rest all your elaborate plans and tactics 
For Knowing Him, 
For they are all just frozen spring buds 
Far, 
So far from Summer's Divine Gold. 
Awake, my dear. 
Be kind to your sleeping heart. 
Take it out into the vast fields of Light 
And let it breathe. 
Say, 
"Love, 
Give me back my wings. 
Lift me, 
Lift me nearer." 
Say to the sun and moon, 
Say to our dear Friend, 
"I will take You up now, Beloved, 
On that wonderful Dance You promised!" 
I Know the Way You Can Get I know the way you can get 
When you have not had a drink of Love: 
Your face hardens, 
Your sweet muscles cramp. 
Children become concerned 
About a strange look that appears in your eyes 
Which even begins to worry your own mirror 
And nose. 
Squirrels and birds sense your sadness 
And call an important conference in a tall tree. 
They decide which secret code to chant 
To help your mind and soul. 
Even angels fear that brand of madness 
That arrays itself against the world 
And throws sharp stones and spears into 
The innocent 
And into one's self 
O I know the way you can get 
If you have not been out drinking Love: 
You might rip apart 
Every sentence your friends and teachers say, 
Looking for hidden clauses. 
You might weigh every word on a scale 
Like a dead fish. 
You might pull out a ruler to measure 
From every angle in your darkness 
The beautiful dimensions of a heart you once 
Trusted. 
I know the way you can get 
If you have not had a drink from Love's 
Hands. 
That is why all the Great Ones speak of 
The vital need 
To keep Remembering God, 
So you will come to know and see Him 
As being so Playful 
And Wanting, 
Just Wanting to help. 
That is why Hafiz says: 
Bring your cup near me, 
For I am a Sweet Old Vagabond 
With an Infinite Leaking Barrel 
Of Light and Laughter and Truth 
That the Beloved has tied to my back. 
Dear one, 
Indeed, please bring your heart near me. 
For all I care about 
Is quenching your thirst for freedom! 
All a Sane man can ever care about 
Is giving Love! 
The Only Sin I Know If someone sits with me 
And we talk about the Beloved, 
If I cannot give his heart comfort, 
If I cannot make him feel better 
About himself and this world, 
Then, Hafiz, 
Quickly run to the mosque and pray .For you have just committed 
The only sin I know. 
Laughter What is laughter? What is laughter? 
It is God waking up! O it is God waking up! 
It is the sun poking its sweet head out 
From behind a cloud 
You have been carrying too long, 
Veiling your eyes and heart. 
It is Light breaking ground for a great Structure 
That is your Real body-called Truth. 
It is happiness applauding itself and then taking flight 
To embrace everyone and everything in this world. 
Laughter is the polestar 
Held in the sky by our Beloved, 
Who eternally says, 
"Yes, dear ones, come this way, 
Come this way toward Me and Love! 
Come with your tender mouths moving 
And your beautiful tongues conducting songs 
And with your movements  -your magic movements  
Of hands and feet and glands and cells -  Dancing! 
Know that to God's Eye, 
All movement is a Wondrous Language, 
And Music -such exquisite, wild Music!" 
O what is laughter, Hafiz? 
What is this precious love and laughter 
Budding in our hearts? 
It is the glorious sound 
Of a soul waking up! 
From ‘Tonight the Subject is Love’ At this Party I don’t want to be the only one here Telling all the secrets .Filling up all the bowls at this party, Taking all the laughs. 1 would like you To start putting things on the table That can also feed the soul The way 1 do. That way We can invite A hell of a lot more Friends. No Other Kind of Light 
Find that flame, that love, 
That Wonderful Man 
Who can bum beneath the water. 
No other kind of light 
Will cook the food you 
Need. 
Not With Wings 
Here soar 
Not with wings 
But with your moving hands and feet 
And sweating brows – 
Standing by your Beloved’s side 
Reaching out to comfort this world 
With your cup of solace 
Drawn from your vast reservoir of Truth. 
Here soar 
Not with your eyes and senses 
That turn their backs 
On the earth’s sweet stumbling dance 
Which needs you. 
Here love, O here love, 
With your mouth tender and open upon your lover, 
And with your heart on duty 
To the souls of rivers, children,  forest animals,  
All the shy feathered ones and laughing, jumping, 
Shining fish. 
O here, pilgrim, 
Love 
On this holy battleground of life 
Where there are bleeding men 
Who are calling for a sacred drink, 
A gentle word or touch from man 
Or God. 
Hafiz! why just serve and play with angels? 
They are already content. 
Brew your knowledge well for men 
With aching minds and guts! 
And for those wayfarers who have gained 
The rare courageous thirsts 
That can never be relinquished 
Until Union! 
Hafiz! 
Leave your recipes in golden drums. 
Tie those barrels to the backs of camels 
Who will keep circumambulating the worlds, 
Giving nourishment 
To all our tender wondrous spheres. 
O here love, O love right here. 
Find your happiness, dear wayfarer, 
With your beautiful lips and body 
So sweetly opened, 
Yielding their vital gifts upon 
This magnificent 
Earth. 
Venus Just Asked Me 
Perhaps 
For just one minute out of the day, 
It may be of value to torture yourself 
With thoughts like, 
“I should be doing 
A hell of a lot more with my life than I am  .Cause I’m so damn talented.” 
But remember, 
For just one minute out of the day. 
With all the rest of your time, 
It would be best 
To try 
Looking upon your self more as God does. 
For He knows 
Your true royal nature. 
God is never confused 
And can see Only Himself in you. 
My dear, 
Venus just leaned down and asked me 
To tell you a secret, to confess 
She’s just a mirror who has been stealing 
Your light and music for centuries. 
She knows as does Hafiz, 
You are the sole heir to 
The King. 
Ten Thousand Idiots It is always a danger To the aspirant On the Path When one begins To believe and Act As if the ten thousand idiots Who so long ruled And lived Inside Have all packed their bags And skipped town Or Died . From ‘The Gift’ My spring eyes still warm faces, and awake verdant earths in your soul. A Poet A Poet is someone 
Who can pour light into a cup, 
Then raise it to nourish 
Your beautiful parched, holy mouth. 
LOOKING FOR GOOD FISH Why complain about life If you are looking for good fish And have followed some idiot Into the middle of the copper market? Why go crazy If you are looking for fine silk And you keep rubbing your hands against Burlap and hemp sacks? If your heart really needs to touch a face That is filled with abundance Then why didn't you come to this Old Man sooner? For my cheek is the universe's cloister And if you can make your prayers sweet enough Tonight Then Hafiz will lean over and offer you All the warmth in my body In case God is busy Doing something else Somewhere. Why complain if you are looking To quench your spirit's longing And have followed a rat into a desert. If your soul really needs to touch a face That is always filled with compassion And tenderness Then why, Why my dear Did you not come to your friend Hafiz Sooner? WE HAVE NOT COME TO 
TAKE PRISONERS 
We have not come here to take prisoners, 
But to surrender ever more deeply 
To freedom and joy. 
We have not come into this exquisite world 
To hold ourselves hostage from love. 
Run my dear, 
From anything 
That may not strengthen 
Your precious budding wings. 
Run like hell my dear, 
From anyone likely 
To put a sharp knife 
Into the sacred, tender vision 
Of your beautiful heart. 
We have a duty to befriend 
Those aspects of obedience 
That stand outside of our house 
And shout to our reason 
"O please, O please, 
Come out and play." 
For we have not come here to take prisoners 
Or to confine our wondrous spirits, 
But to experience ever and ever more deeply 
Our divine courage, freedom, and 
Light! 
I RAI N 
I rain 
Because your meadows call 
For God. 
I weave light into words so that 
When your mind holds them 
Your eyes will relinquish their sadness, 
Turn bright, a little brighter, giving to us 
The way a candle does 
To the dark. 
I have wrapped my laughter like a birthday gift 
And left it beside your bed. 
I have planted the wisdom in my heart 
Next to every signpost in the sky. 
A wealthy man 
Often becomes eccentric, 
A divine crazed soul 
Is transformed into infinite generosity 
Tying gold sacks of gratuity 
To the dangling feet of moons, planets, ecstatic 
Midair dervishes, and singing birds. 
I speak 
Because every cell in your body 
Is reaching out 
For God. 
GOD JUST CAME NEAR No One In need of love Can sit with my verse for An hour And then walk away without carrying Golden tools, And feeling that God Just came Near. THE SUN NEVER SAYS Even After All this time The sun never says to the earth, “You owe Me.” Look What happens With a love like that, It lights the Whole Sky. WHY JUST ASK THE DONKEY 
Why Just ask the donkey in me To speak to the donkey in you, When I have so many other beautiful animals And brilliant colored birds inside That are all longing to say something wonderful And exciting to your heart? Let's open all the locked doors upon our eyes That keep us from knowing the Intelligence That begets love And a more lively and satisfying conversation With the Friend. Let's turn loose our golden falcons So that they can meet in the sky Where our spirits belong -  Necking like two Hot kids. Let's hold hands and get drunk near the sun And sing sweet songs to God Until He joins us with a few notes From His own sublime lute and drum. If you have a better idea Of how to pass a lonely night After your glands may have performed All their little magic Then speak up sweethearts, speak up, For Hafiz and all the world will listen. Why just bring your donkey to me Asking for stale hay And a boring conference with the idiot In regards to this precious matter – Such a precious matter as love, When I have so many other divine animals And brilliant colored birds inside That are all longing To so sweetly Greet You! You carry all the ingredients To turn your existence into joy, Mix them, mix Them! CURFEWS Noise Is a cruel ruler Who is always imposing Curfews, While Stillness and quiet Break open the vintage Bottles, Awake the real Band. Art is the conversation between lovers. 
Art offers an opening for the heart. 
True art makes the divine silence in the soul 
Break into applause. 
Art is, at last, the knowledge of 
Where we are standing – 
Where we are standing 
In this Wonderland 
When we rip off all our clothes 
And this blind man's patch, veil, 
That got tied across our brow. 
Art is the conversation between lovers. 
True art awakes the 
Extraordinary 
Ovation. 
THE VINTAGE MAN The Difference Between a good artist And a great one Is: The novice Will often lay down his tool Or brush Then pick up an invisible club On the mind's table And helplessly smash the easels and Jade. Whereas the vintage man No longer hurts himself or anyone And keeps on Sculpting Light. JUST LOOKING FOR TROUBLE 
I once had a student 
Who would sit alone in his house at night 
Shivering with worries 
And fears, 
And, come morning, 
He would often look as though 
He had been raped 
By a ghost. 
Then one day my pity 
Crafted for him a knife 
From my own divine sword. 
Since then, 
I have become very proud 
Of this student. 
For now, come night, 
Not only has he lost all his fear, 
Now he goes out 
Just looking for 
Trouble. 
The Gift 
Our 
Union is like this: 
You feel cold 
So I reach for a blanket to cover 
Our shivering feet. 
A hunger comes into your body 
So I run to my garden 
And start digging potatoes. 
You ask for a few words of comfort and guidance, 
I quickly kneel at your side offering you 
This whole book-
As a gift. 
You ache with loneliness one night 
So much you weep 
And I say, 
Here's a rope, 
Tie it around me, 
Hafiz 
Will be your companion 
For life. 
THE SCENT OF LIGHT Like a great starving beast My body is quivering Fixed On the scent Of Light. THE STAIRWAY OF EXISTENCE 
We 
Are not 
In pursuit of formalities 
Or fake religious Laws, 
For through the stairway of existence 
We have come to God's 
Door. 
We are 
People who need to love, because 
Love is the soul's life, 
Love is simply creation's greatest joy. 
Through 
The stairway of existence, 
O, through the stairway of existence, Hafiz, 
Have 
You now come, 
Have we all now come to 
The Beloved's 
Door. 
Behind the veil Hafiz and angels sometimes weep Because most eyes are rarely glad And your divine beauty is still too frightened To unfurl its thousand swaying arms. STOP BEING SO RELIGIOUS What Do sad people have in Common? It seems They have all built a shrine To the past And often go there And do a strange wail and Worship. What is the beginning of Happiness? It is to stop being So religious Like That. IT FELT LOVE How Did the rose Ever open its heart And give to this world All its Beauty? It felt the encouragement of light Against its Being, Otherwise, We all remain Too Frightened. TWO BEARS 
Once 
After a hard day's forage 
Two bears sat together in silence 
On a beautiful vista 
Watching the sun go down 
And feeling deeply grateful 
For life. 
Though, after a while 
A thought-provoking conversation began 
Which turned to the topic of 
Fame. 
The one bear said, 
"Did you hear about Rustam? 
He has become famous 
And travels from city to city 
In a golden cage; 
He performs to hundreds of people 
Who laugh and applaud 
His carnival 
Stunts." 
The other bear thought for 
A few seconds 
Then started 
Weeping. 
THE WARRIOR 
The warriors tame 
The beasts in their past 
So that the night's hoofs 
Can no longer break the jeweled vision 
In the heart. 
The intelligent and the brave 
Open every closet in the future and evict 
All the mind's ghosts who have the bad habit 
Of barfing everywhere. 
For a long time the Universe 
Has been germinating in your spine 
But only a Pir* has the talent, 
The courage to slay 
The past-giant, the future-anxieties. 
The warrior 
Wisely sits in a circle 
With other men 
Gathering the strength to unmask 
Himself, 
Then 
Sits, giving, 
Like a great illumined planet on 
The 
Earth. 
* Persian: Saint Tiny Gods 
Some gods say, the tiny ones, 
"1 am not here in your vibrant, moist lips 
That need to beach themselves upon 
The golden shore of a 
Naked body." 
Some gods say, "I am not 
The scarred yearning in the unrequited soul; 
I am not the blushing cheek 
Of every star and 
Planet-
I am not the applauding Chef 
Of those precious secretions that can distill 
The whole mind into a perfect wincing jewel, if only 
For a moment; 
Nor do 1 reside in every pile of sweet warm dung 
Born of the earth's 
Gratuity." 
Some gods say, the ones we need to hang, 
"Your mouth is not designed to know His, 
Love was not born to consume 
The luminous 
Realms." 
Dear ones, 
Beware of the tiny gods frightened men 
Create 
To bring an anesthetic relief 
To their sad 
Days. 
ELEGANCE It Is not easy To stop thinking ill Of others. Usually one must enter into a friendship With a person Who has accomplished that great feat himself Then Something Might start to rub off on you Of that True Elegance. DROPPING KEYS The small man Builds cages for everyone He Knows. While the sage, Who has to duck his head When the moon is low, Keeps dropping keys all night long For the Beautiful Rowdy Prisoners. Spiced Manna 
Someone 
Will steal you if you don't 
Stay near, 
And sell you as a slave in the 
Market. 
I sing 
To the nightingales' hearts 
Hoping they will learn 
My verse 
So that no one will ever imprison 
Your brilliant angel 
Feathers. 
Have I put enough spiced manna 
On your plate 
Tonight 
In this Tavern 
Where Hafiz 
Serves? 
If not please wait 
For more light is now 
Fermenting. 
Someone will steal you if you 
Don't stay near, 
And sell you as a slave in 
The market, 
So your Beloved and I 
Sing. 
BECOMING HUMAN 
Once a man came to me and spoke for hours about 
"His great visions of God" he felt he was having. 
He asked me for confirmation, saying, 
"Are these wondrous dreams true?" 
I replied, "How many goats do you have?" 
He looked surprised and said, 
"I am speaking of sublime visions 
And you ask 
About goats!" 
And I spoke again saying, 
"Yes, brother – how many do you have?" 
"Well, Hafiz, I have sixty-two." 
'And how many wives?" Again he looked surprised, then said, "Four." "How many rose bushes in your garden, 
How many children, 
Are your parents still alive, 
Do you feed the birds in winter?" 
And to all he answered. 
Then I said, 
"You asked me if I thought your visions were true, 
I would say that they were if they make you become 
More human, 
More kind to every creature and plant 
That you know." 
THE THOUSAND-STRINGED INSTRUMENT 
The heart is 
The thousand-stringed instrument. 
Our sadness and fear come from being 
Out of tune with love. 
All day long God coaxes my lips 
To speak, 
So that your tears will not stain 
His green dress. 
It is not that the Friend is vain, 
It is just your life we care about. 
Sometimes the Beloved 
Takes my pen in hand, 
For Hafiz is just a simple man. 
The other day the Old One 
Wrote on the Tavern wall: 
"The heart is 
The thousand-stringed instrument 
That can only be tuned with 
Love.” 
The God Who Only Knows Four Words Every 
Child 
Has known God, 
Not the God of names, 
Not the God of don'ts, 
Not the God who ever does 
Anything weird, 
But the God who only knows four words 
And keeps repeating them, saying: 
"Come dance with Me." 
Come 
Dance. 
THE DIAMOND TAKES SHAPE Some parrots Have become so skilled with The human voice They could give a brilliant discourse About freedom and God And an unsighted man nearby might Even begin applauding with The thought: I just heard jewels fall from a Great saint's mouth, Though my Master used to say, "The diamond takes shape slowly With integrity's great force, And from The profound courage to never relinquish love." Some parrots have become so skilled With words, The blind turn over their gold And lives to caged Feathers. WHAT IS THE ROOT? What Is the Root of all these Words? One thing: love. But a love so deep and sweet It needed to express itself With scents, sounds, colors That never before Existed. TROUBLED? 
Troubled? 
Then stay with me, for I'm not. 
Lonely? 
A thousand naked amorous ones dwell in ancient caves 
Beneath my eyelids. 
Riches? 
Here's a pick, 
My whole body is an emerald that begs, 
“Take me.” 
Write all that worries you on a piece of parchment; 
Offer it to God. 
Even from the distance of a millennium 
I can lean the flame in my heart 
Into your life 
And turn 
All that frightens you 
Into holy 
Incense 
Ash. 
ACT GREAT 
What is the key 
To untie the knot of your mind's suffering? 
What 
Is the esoteric secret 
To slay the crazed one whom each of us 
Did wed 
And who can ruin 
Our heart's and eye's exquisite tender 
Landscape? 
Hafiz has found 
Two emerald words that 
Restored 
Me 
That I now cling to as I would sacred 
Tresses of my Beloved's 
Hair: 
Act great. 
My dear, always act great. 
What is the key 
To untie the knot of the mind's suffering? 
Benevolent thought, sound 
And movement. 
